README.md, before:

<h1 align="center">Email Data Generation using Deep Learning</h1>

<div align="center">

Project for deep-learning-based email generator.

[Full Documentation](https://plamephiaj.github.io/data-sythesis-research/design/readme.html)

</div>

# TriGuardFL: TRIPLE-LAYER DETECTION FOR BYZANTINE-ROBUST FEDERATED LEARNING AGAINST MODEL POISONING ATTACKS

[![Python Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.9+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

## Abstract

**Data Sythesis Research" ....
## Tech Stack

* **Python 3.9+**
* **uv**: For fast and reliable project environment and dependency management.
* **PyTorch**
* **pyproject.toml**: For declaring project metadata and dependencies.

## Installation and Usage

This project uses `uv` for environment management to ensure a fast and consistent setup process.

### 1. Prerequisites

Ensure you have Python 3.9+ and `uv` installed on your system.

### 2. Setup Steps

```bash
# 1. Clone this repository
git clone repo_addr
cd data-sythesis-research

# 2. Create a virtual environment using uv
# This will create a .venv folder in the current directory
uv venv

# 3. Activate the virtual environment on Ubuntu 24.04
source .venv/bin/activate

# 4. Install project dependencies
# uv will automatically read the pyproject.toml file and install all dependencies
uv pip install -e .
```

If you have defined development dependencies (e.g., `pytest`) in your `pyproject.toml`, you can install them with:
```bash
uv pip install ".[dev]"
```


### 3. Running an Experiment

This project is configured with a command-line entry point called 'ds-run', which makes running experiments simple and reproducible. You no longer need to call python src/byzantine_robust_fl/main.py directly.

All parameters are controlled via command-line arguments.

Example 1: Basic MNIST experiment without attacks
This command runs a simple experiment for 10 epochs on the MNIST dataset with an MLP model.

```bash
ds-run --config configs/demo1.yaml
```
You can see all available options by running:

```bash
ds-run --help
```

## Expected Results

(Optional) You can showcase example plots or key results from your project runs here, such as:
* A comparison of model accuracy under different aggregation rules.
* The loss curve convergence with and without Byzantine attacks.

![Model Accuracy Comparison](placeholder_accuracy_plot.png)

## Contributing

Contributions of any kind are welcome! If you have a great idea or find a bug, feel free to submit a Pull Request or create an Issue.

1.  Fork the Project
2.  Create your Feature Branch (`git checkout -b feature/Feature`)
3.  Commit your Changes (`git commit -m 'Add some Feature'`)
4.  Push to the Branch (`git push origin feature/Feature`)
5.  Open a Pull Request

## 📄 License

This project is distributed under the MIT License. See the `LICENSE` file for more information.

Commit message:

First version that can run training smoothly.

README.md, after:

<h1 align="center">Email Data Generation using Deep Learning</h1>

<div align="center">

Project for deep-learning-based email generator.

[Full Documentation](https://plamephiaj.github.io/data-sythesis-research/design/readme.html)

</div>

# Data Sythesis Research: Rule-guided Discrete Diffusion for Email Generation

[![Python Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.13+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

## Abstract

This project aims to design and implement a deep learning framework that leverages both Diffusion Models and Large Language Models (LLMs) to collaboratively generate “phishing-style” email samples, enabling security researchers to test/evaluate email filters and train anti-phishing detection models.

With the development of deep learning technology, using deep learning—especially advanced large language models—for phishing email detection has become a promising solution. Data is fundamental to driving the progress of deep learning models, but due to the sensitive nature of phishing emails, which often contain a large amount of malicious content and sensitive information, obtaining such data is much more difficult than for other types. Existing open-source phishing email datasets have undergone various anonymization processes, resulting in the loss of original information, and most of the data is outdated and can no longer meet the needs of rapidly evolving phishing strategies. This work aims to use diffusion models and LLMs to generate phishing emails, providing high-quality training data for downstream detection models.
## Tech Stack

* **Python 3.13+**
* **uv**: For fast and reliable project environment and dependency management.
* **PyTorch**
* **pyproject.toml**: For declaring project metadata and dependencies.

## Installation and Usage

This project uses `uv` for environment management to ensure a fast and consistent setup process.

### 1. Prerequisites

Ensure you have Python 3.13+ and `uv` installed on your system.

### 2. Setup Steps

```bash
# 1. Clone this repository
git clone https://github.com/PlamephiaJ/data-sythesis-research
cd data-sythesis-research

# 2. Create a virtual environment using uv
# This will create a .venv folder in the current directory
uv venv

# 3. Activate the virtual environment on Ubuntu 24.04
source .venv/bin/activate

# 4. Install project dependencies
# uv will automatically read the pyproject.toml file and install all dependencies
uv pip install -e .
```

If you have defined development dependencies (e.g., `pytest`) in your `pyproject.toml`, you can install them with:
```bash
uv pip install ".[dev]"
```


### 3. Running an Experiment

This project is configured with a command-line entry point called 'ds-run', which makes running experiments simple and reproducible. You no longer need to call python directly.

All parameters are controlled via command-line arguments.

Example 1: Basic MNIST experiment without attacks
This command runs a simple experiment for 10 epochs on the MNIST dataset with an MLP model.

```bash
ds-run --config configs/demo1.yaml
```
You can see all available options by running:

```bash
ds-run --help
```

## Expected Results

(Optional) You can showcase example plots or key results from your project runs here, such as:
* A comparison of model accuracy under different aggregation rules.
* The loss curve convergence with and without Byzantine attacks.

![Model Accuracy Comparison](placeholder_accuracy_plot.png)

## Contributing

Contributions of any kind are welcome! If you have a great idea or find a bug, feel free to submit a Pull Request or create an Issue.

1.  Fork the Project
2.  Create your Feature Branch (`git checkout -b feature/Feature`)
3.  Commit your Changes (`git commit -m 'Add some Feature'`)
4.  Push to the Branch (`git push origin feature/Feature`)
5.  Open a Pull Request

## 📄 License

This project is distributed under the MIT License. See the `LICENSE` file for more information.
